Welcome, Jillian.
Good morning, Jillian. Can you, can you hear us?
Are you there?
Yes, I am. I am. Good morning.
Good morning. Thank you so much
for joining us this morning.
Uh, we're very grateful for your time.
Uh, we have you for 10 minutes as far as submission process,
um, and we're looking forward to your comments
and opening remarks.
And please, if you are kind enough to leave us a little bit
of time for questions that would be
gratefully received. Thank. Thank you.
Thank you. Now, my interest in this is that I was counsel
for the applicants in the 2020 judicial review case,
which I did on a pro bono basis.
There was a lot of work involved.
We were successful in obtaining a ruling that the use
of farrowing crates is unlawful.
Now, I oppose this bill
and I have eight points
to make briefly in my 10 minute challenge, as well
as some redrafting recommendations,
but I do hope you'll also read, uh,
my full submission at some stage.
One, I'm really appalled
that despite the court's clear directions to the minister
and to NPI, this bill will postpone any change at all
for another 10 years.
And I ask, where's the respect for the court
and for the rule of law?
Two, the new system that will come into place
in 10 years will still be noncompliant with the act.
Now, that's clearly NACS view, and
although there was a suggestion from the committee yesterday
that Naac may have revised its view
or fallen into line, there has been no change.
NACS letter to the minister of five April this year needs
to be read in full,
not just a sentence selectively taken out of context.
Three, why 10 years?
In my submission, that's arbitrary
and excessive in June this year,
MPI in New Zealand pork.
And I referred to these documents in my submission,
were both comfortable.
That, and I quote,
five years was sufficient and appropriate.
It seems that the minister on a whim has extended it
to 10 years just to match the phase in time
of the rather measly increase in grower space.
To me, this is a nonsense.
I ask, does he understand the act?
Does he understand his obligations under it?
Four, this urgency that we now have is self-inflicted.
MPI advised the minister,
and again, the documents are referred to in my submission,
advise the minister two years ago of the power in the act
to extend the regulations for another five years.
He did nothing. Now it's too late.
And yet we see in the explanatory note to the bill
and in the regulatory impact statement, a statement
that this extension power has already been exercised.
That's a deliberately false statement to cabinet,
to parliament and to the public.
Five. I suggest that the time for wallowing, if I can use
that word in continuing debate about the science has
surely long gone.
It's been 26 years.
The high court ruled that faring crates are non-compliant
end of, in our high court case, we had independent
evidence from an internationally regarded expert,
Dr. Emma Baxter from the University of Edinburgh.
She gave uncontested evidence
that the mortality rate across all farrowing systems is
roughly the same.
Yes, I agree that in farrowing crates, sorry,
without farrowing crates, more piglets get squashed.
But with farrowing crates, more piglets die of starvation
or are stillborn.
The real issue for the industry, I would suggest is one
of infrastructure cost six conflicts of interest.
What's extraordinary in this case is that the minister was
not only effectively AEE stakeholder in
2022, he's now the decision maker
because federated farmers gave a substantive submission in
April, 2022 when this minister was the
president of that organization.
That submission opposed all of suggestions, was highly
critical of Naac
and also endorsed fully New Zealand pork's proposals
and recommended that the Minister now consent co consult
just with New Zealand pork.
Uh, there's also the minister's, you know,
more generally his interests in, in the dairy industry.
I haven't seen any public disclosure
of any declared conflict of interest
or measures to address that, such as transfers
of responsibility, blind trusts, and the like. Seven,
Excuse me, Jillian, I don't mean to interrupt you,
but we, we, we do have to wind up if you are capable.
Thank you.
I'm sorry. I just have a few more points to make.
No, no, no. Please apply.
If you could finish those, that would be lovely.
Thank you so much. Okay.
Seven. Ordinary New Zealanders have
to observe the laws farmers of other kinds of livestock have
to outdoor pig farmers have.
Why not this particular industry group?
We are not just talking about mom
and dad farmers, some pork.
A a heavyweight player is wholly Australian owned.
The, the la the largest, uh,
pork producer in Australasia eight.
I've suggested that the issues
around this government's arrangements
with sun pork need further investigation.
Um, they want to roll out their maternity ring.
It uses the same space as a farrowing crate.
That's a coincidence.
Um, of course that would rule out
NACS recommendations if that is to happen.
And I've raised the question whether the oi the Overseas
investment office consent in 2022, uh,
was a special condition of that, that be a new
suncorp's new infrastructure be rolled out.
I'd like to know if that was a reference to their,
um, maternity ring.
My recommendations that to address the urgency, all you need
to do in this bill is to have an extension
of the regulations for up to five years.
That would do it. The matter could then continue under the
act in the normal way, preferably with responsibility given
to a different minister.
Another alternative, still just an extension up
to five years, uh, with schedule two of the bill, uh,
amended to adopt recommendations
either option in the long term in my submission, will lead
to an outcome that is, that is more
to adopt the minister's own phrasing, sensible,
practical, and affordable.
Thank you.
Mark. I Had a quick question. Jillian. Sorry.
I, um, I apologize. We, we, these were five minute slots.
We've met time, uh,
and don't have the, the, the luxury of the time.
I wish we had, uh, to ask you any questions.
So I hope you have a lovely day. Uh,
Mr. Chair, just, we
are running a little bit ahead of time.
Can I ask one really fast question? It's quick.
Yeah. Um, yes, please. Quick. Yeah.
It's just given the nature of the submission.
Um, thanks, Jillian. My question is very quick.
At the top of your submission, you said that, uh,
you think the minister, the,
the law would actually still be unlawful.
Is that your legal, um, view that, uh,
this would actually still open up
legal risk for the industry?
Yes. If, if the proposal that's to come into force,
the new regulations that are supposed
to come into force in 10 days were made
by regulation in the ordinary way, instead
of being enshrined in an act of parliament,
I would have another successful judicial review.
Thank you. Great answer. Thank you so much, Jillian.
Have thanks again. Have a lovely day. Thank
You. Thank
you so much. We now go across to Ashley o Driscoll
for five minutes.
Hello. Good morning. Good morning.
Thank you so much for joining us this morning.
Uh, we have you, Ashley, for five minutes.
I'm pretty sure you know how this works.
Um, you tell us what you think
and if you can allow us a bit of time
for questions in your five minute slot.
That's entirely up to you. Thank you so much.
Um, I'd like to thank the committee for taking the time
to consider my submission.
I've prepared a statement that's about three minutes long,
so a little bit of time at the end.
Mm-hmm. Um, so my name is Ashley o Driscoll,
and I'm a veterinarian and a beef farmer.
I've worked along MPI as an expert witness on a large number
of animal welfare cases over the past four years.
In 2022, I was involved in an animal welfare investigation
with MPI on a conventional chicken egg farm.
Conventional layer cages are known as battery cages,
which have been phased out New Zealand due to the fact
that these cages severely restrict a chicken's avail ability
to perform their most normal behaviors.
At the time of the investigation, battery cages had not
yet been phased out, but the welfare concern in this case
was overcrowding.
The overcrowding situation
of these chickens was successfully prosecuted
by MPI on the basis that the persons in charge failed
to allow hens the opportunity to display normal patterns
of behavior, which directly relates to one
of the five foundational requirements in section four
of the New Zealand Animal Welfare Act.
In the sentencing summary,
normal behavior was further defined as standing, turning
around stretching wings, brooding and walking.
Barrowing and mating crates prohibit the same normal
behaviors of turning around
and walking among other limited behaviors.
The usage of these crates may increase profitability
and decrease piglet death,
but this is not an acceptable justification
for the distress experience by thousands of sows.
The standard usage
of battery cages also increased profitability
and decreased he death,
but the emphasis was correctly placed on removing the
distress caused by the inhibition of normal movement.
The extended use of crates is not in line with our values.
As a country as recognized during the High CR Court
of New Zealand grueling, the layer industry managed
to phase out battery cages over a period
of five years at a significant cost to the industry.
I fail to understand why the pork industry requires a
further 10 years to complete the transition away from
extended usage of farrowing and mating crates.
During that period, thousands
of individual pigs will continue experience
to experience weeks of unreasonable distress
and frustration due to their inability to perform some
of their most basic behaviors.
I spend a large portion of my time ensuring
that minimum welfare standards are met for various species
of animals within New Zealand.
The stated objective of this bill is to quote, ensure
that locally produced pork products meet good animal
welfare practices.
It is my strong professional opinion that a failure
to provide the structure
and requirements for a quick transition away from extended
usage of crates is a failure
to provide minimum animal welfare,
let alone good animal welfare. Thank you.
Thank you. Very good submission and, and,
and quite succinct, um, um, actually, very grateful for it.
Very quick question. As a veterinarian, um,
would you appreciate
and be willing to accept on farm visitation?
We, free range pigs have
disproportionately killed their piglets in farrowing.
Um, I, I I I, I'm struck by
your rationale when we're trying to remove, uh, uh,
said risk to animal welfare.
And I think you're right about the sos I think this is
something that we've really gotta grapple with.
But how do you square
as a professional going on farm in a free range environment
and saying, I now see a lot of dead piglets.
Do you think in your future, that's something
that you could come to accept if that was the case?
So I think what you're asking is, like I said,
the same thing that was asked about battery cages.
So the prevalence of disease
and mortality is higher in, in situations
that are not battery cages.
However, that is also, that's at the expense
of lifelong suffering as far as freedom of movement goes.
Mm-hmm. So, as your previous speaker said, there is,
it's not, it's not a huge,
so I don't work within the pork industry,
so I can't quote you numbers, but it's not a huge increase
in piglet mortality, but I recognize that it's there.
Yes. It's just not, it's, it's not justifiable
for the weeks that, that these animals are,
are not allowed to move.
The severity of the welfare
impacts are not justifiable.
So For pig loss, you'll, you'll have pig lot loss.
So, very quickly, Ashley, you,
you're saying you acknowledge that there will be an increase
of piglet mortality, correct?
Oh, yeah. I acknowledge that in my statement. Yep.
That's well known as it was in the layer industry. Yep,
Yep, yep. Okay.
Very good. Thank you so much. Very, very grateful.
Um, it's always lovely to have you people,
I wish we could talk to you more,
but we've got a a whole line of of, of people we've got
to get through today that are of different opinions.
So thank you, Ashley.
Very grateful for your time and very succinct delivery. Yep.
Um, and, and go. Well, thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, we now move across to Danielle Darfield.
Sure. Hello. Hello. Welcome.
Danielle, this, uh, lovely to have you here.
I believe we have you for five minutes.
So I will leave it with you.
You can tell us your thoughts and ideas,
and if you would like questions,
please leave a bit of time at the end.
Thank you, mark. Yeah.
So thank you for listening to me today.
I'm an adjunct lecturer of animal law at the University
of Otago, and I've been an animal law practitioner
for a number of years, including, uh,
as the former president of the New Zealand
Animal Law Association.
And like many others who have spoken on this bill,
I'm very concerned by it.
I oppose it. And I have five points I'd like to make.
So, firstly, this bill completely undermines the decision
of the high court and the purpose of the Animal Offer Act.
The country's leading piece of animal offer legislation.
So as we heard just
before from Jillian co kc, there was a 2020 decision
by the high court in which Fahr crates were
found to be illegal.
And this result in a phase out period,
which this bill now sidesteps,
and I completely echo the comments made by Jillian Co, uh,
in relation to the concerns around the rule of law, um,
in terms of a bill completely undermining their judgment.
So secondly, the real problem with this piece
of legislation is it deprives the 2015 amendment
to the Animal Welfare Act of its main effect and purpose.
So one of the main purposes of the Animal Welfare Act is
to allow animals to express normal patterns of behavior.
And prior to 2015,
there was a provision in the act which allowed in
exceptional circumstances, practices to continue,
which did not allow animals
to express normal patterns of behavior.
And this was routinely used
to justify certain practices like pH crates
and battery cages, um, which actually, um,
do not meet the obligations of the act.
And that's why Parliament amended the ACT in 2015, right,
and inserted this new regime under Section 1 8 3 A
to require non-compliant practices to be clearly phased out
with strict time limits.
And this bill completely ignores those time limits
and are a few in this regard to a couple
of key comments from Justice Lin, her high court judgment,
in which she said it was plain
that Parliament's intention in passing this amendment was
to ensure that noncompliant practices were
to be time limited up to fi 10 years only,
and ultimately phased out,
and that any extension of time was to be limited to up
to five years once only.
I also refer you to her comment at paragraph 84,
that Frates were explicitly given as an example
of a non-compliant practice in the explanatory note
to the 2015 bill, um, which Section 180 3 sought to address.
So this bill is effectively saying Section 180 3 applies
except when we don't want it to,
and that's very problematic.
Thirdly, this bill continues beyond 2035 practices,
which I think by any reasonable interpretation,
are unnecessary within the meaning
of the Animal Welfare Act.
We all know that half
of pig farmers already farm without the use
of f crates in New Zealand,
and they abandoned a number of countries like Sweden,
Switzerland, and Norway, which you know,
are clearly leading, um, ahead of New Zealand,
and which obviously raises some concerns
for New Zealand's international reputation with respect
to animal welfare as well.
And I echo completely Jillian COO's concerns
that Naac was a government's expert committee on animal
welfare, has this view, and yet it's been ignored.
Fourthly, this bill has been subject
to significant procedural defects.
It has not been subject to a proper consultation.
Now, NAAC consulted on two options in their draft pick code
in 2022, free faring
or temporary creatine for up to 72 hours.
And public consultations are a key principle
under the Animal Offer Act.
They're required. And that is
because there is enormous public interest in the
treatment of animals in art.
And yet these proposals as put forward in this bill,
have not been a proper properly consulted.
And this, uh, rush through piece
of legislation is not an adequate substitute for that.
Firstly, I'm pretty concerned, uh, by
what I've seen in the news subsequent
to filing my written submission, which is come out
through Official Information Act request,
which gives pretty strong indications of regulatory capture,
how this is a piece of public interest legislation.
The Animal Welfare Act, its purpose is
to uphold the public's belief in the
humane treatment of animals.
And Justice Kell in her high court decision emphasize
that practicality and economic impact are not the primary
purpose of the legislation
and they cannot override the welfare obligations of the act.
But this bill seems to ignore that.
Um, and I am rather concerned by the influence
that New Zealand pork seems to have had,
uh, on this legislation.
It seems unduly large,
it seems more significant in nacs own impact despite them
being the, you know, key committee under the legislation
for recommending animal welfare changes.
So those are the main, my main points
and I'm, I'm happy to take any questions.
Members, we have about a minute left to, um,
have questions if Dan Daniel would like
to field any from, uh, my team.
Please speak up now
because we've got Danielle for about a minute.
Uh, Danielle, there appear to be no questions.
Thank you so much for your submission.
We are very grateful for your submission.
Um, it's very succinct and your delivery.
Um, so I hope you have a great day
and thank you for your thoughts.
Thank you for your thoughts and ideas.
Thank you very much. Take care. Have a great day. Team.
We now move across to, uh, fresh Pork New Zealand,
um, limited.
They are for 10 minutes
and I'm not sure who I'm speaking to in New Zealand port,
but please by all means launch into your submission.
Well, um, good morning everyone.
Um, my name's Lyndon Glass.
I'm the MD of, uh, fresh Port New Zealand,
and with me is Shannon Parham, uh,
our GM of Livestock Supply.
Um, we're obviously here
to provide an oral submission on behalf
of Fresh Port New Zealand.
First, sorry.
No, no, no. Thank you GI wanna thank you
so much for your time today.
Appreciate you. Were there and we're here.
And I apologize for our,
our absence parliament is in
recess, so I will leave it with you.
Yep. No, that's fine.
No, um, just wanna thank the committee for the opportunity
to submit and, uh, for, for your time here today.
Uh, and we'll take, uh, take it that our submission is read.
Uh, look, fresh Pork is a family owned business, um,
that has been operating for over 40 years.
We currently employ about 150 people.
Um, we partner with about 20 farmers in the South island.
Uh, most of those farmers are also family owned businesses.
Combined with our various partners,
we estimate our contribution to the New Zealand economy
to be more than 350 million.
We're currently domestic only.
Uh, and, uh, we're proud
to feed Kiwis right around, uh, the country.
With high quality New Zealand growing pork, fresh pork.
New Zealand fully supports the continuous improvement
of our industry, and we support regulations
and standards that best enabled this
to happen both now and into the future.
We are in support of the proposed animal welfare amendment
bill on the basis that we believe
that provides the best science-based welfare position, uh,
for both the sour
and the piglet, along with, uh, an appropriate timeframe
to make what will be significant changes for the industry.
Fresh port also believes that in conjunction
with proposed changes, that it is critical
that all pork consumed here in New Zealand must meet our
New Zealand wealthiest standards.
Today, that is not the case with about 60%
of pork consumed in New Zealand coming from other countries,
most of which does not meet our current standards,
nevermind the new standards that are being proposed
that New Zealand wants to make the biggest
improvement in pig welfare.
And short core imports also meet our welfare standards.
There's a real risk that without requiring imports
to meet our new standards,
that we will see more New Zealand farmers exit our industry
is they simply can't compete.
In doing so, we will effectively offshore the welfare
standards by allowing low lower welfare imports
to fill the demand gap created.
We are not asking to ban imported pork.
We are saying, what we are saying is
that we need an equal playing field
and strongly request
that this is put in place at the same time
as the new New Zealand Pig welfare code.
We also support the need to improve our country
of our origin labeling on products.
However, this is required
to help the New Zealand consumer be better informed about
where their products come from.
It should not be a substitute to allow lower welfare pork
to be imported into New Zealand.
The last five years have been, uh, particularly frustrating
for the New Zealand pork industry.
Uh, I can generally say that, uh,
this latest welfare code review has created significant
uncertainty for New Zealand pig farmers
and, uh, everyone else in the value chain,
including ourselves.
We've effectively been in limbo for the last five years,
waiting for the new code to be confirmed.
Farmers haven't known where the welfare code was going
to land, so it's been impossible for them
to make an informed call on how
or what to invest in on farm.
While we've heard, uh, various other submissions, uh,
during this process refer
to farmers having five years from 2020 to comply
with the changes, we,
we believe this simply is not the case.
How can we expect farmers to invest hundreds of thousands
of dollars, if not millions of dollars without knowing
what the new peak welfare code is
and what they need to be doing?
I'd suggest not many would do this
and banks would struggle to support funding requirements.
This limbo period has stifled investment in our industry at
time when many want to invest in improvements
and modernization of their operations.
This has been the same for Fresh Port New Zealand,
who is wanting to progress our plans
to modernize our facilities and also become export capable.
We require a well-balanced pig welfare code to provide us
with long-term confidence to invest
and continue to progress our domestic industry.
I just pass over to Shannon, uh, take a, uh, talk us
through a little further on the details about submission.
Alright, Jen, we have about five minutes left,
so if you want any further questions at the end,
just be cognizant of that.
Yeah, I'll, I'll run fast. Uh, thanks Linden.
Um, well, Lydon has touched on who fresh ba nz is,
how critical it is to align input standards
with our own welfare standards
and some key points around
how the industry has been in limbo for the last five years.
I wanted to touch on some of the science-based material
overseas comparisons and the proposed 10 year transitional
period I reference of paper released
by MPI completed in March, 2025,
reviewing 142 scientific papers dealing
with farrowing systems in space allowance.
While I won't go into the specific details,
the co conclusions reached and,
and I will quote from the executive summary, um,
regarding farrowing systems.
The literature suggests that temporary creating systems
in which farrowing crate use is limited to two
to three days pre farrowing until four
to five days post farrowing.
And providing sows with deformable
and manipulative materials with which
to build a nest allows the sour to display normal patterns
of behavior, thereby limiting sour stress while reducing
peri and postnatal piglet mortality, including crushing
and salvaging regarding space allowance for grower pigs.
The statistical tools available
to analyze available literature provide no evidence
that productivity or welfare manage, uh,
measurements will be improved
with a K value greater than 0.03.
The current minimum standard, although K values of 0.034
and 0.39 have been proposed in the literature is three sold
values below which productivity
and welfare compromised respectively.
Accordingly, we conclude that the need
to display normal patterns
of behavior does not on the evidence presently available,
require increasing the minimum K value.
I also want to next address Faren crates as it relates
to other countries usage.
As discussed previously, Faren crates are essentially a way
of temporary confining a sales movement
to mainly stop squashing
of piglets over the first part of the lifecycle.
No country currently fully bans confinement in the current
proposal in front of us for limited confinement
to seven days or 3%
of a sales time would put us in the front
of the pack even when taking into account the transitional
period, uh, just to finish.
Fresh pork is accepting of the 10 year transitional period,
uh, due to the state of limbo of the industry as discussed
by Linden, but also due
to some other factors which will include the timeframe
required for research technologies
and solutions from around the world
that meet our new welfare code planning process,
change resource consenting
and building consents, which take up a significant amount
of time to process and will eat into the transitional time
even before any building commences.
Given the scale of the costs most farmers will need
to debt fund, uh, unlike some of the countries
that we've talked about in the, in Europe, which have
provided significant support to their farmers,
we don't get that support.
So therefore we will defund this,
this will take a significant amount of time, uh, to work
through the process with our banks.
And we're assuming that the state of the debt markets
and the bank's willingness to invest in a sector
and a reflective change, uh, is, is accepting.
And also the last point is we strongly believe
that the 10 year implementation period provides sufficient
time to require inputs to meet our new welfare standards,
which is a must if we really want to improve animal welfare
and support a thriving domestic pork industry.
Um, I'll head back to Linden to close
before we have to take questions.
Thank you.
Yeah, look, I I just wanna close, um,
by re reiterating our support proposed bill, uh,
we see this bill providing positive impacts,
uh, for pig welfare.
However, to ensure we maximize the true welfare benefit,
imported pork must meet, uh, our same,
those same New Zealand standards.
Otherwise, we're ignoring the 60% pork consumed in
New Zealand that currently comes from overseas.
This would provide the biggest improvement in big welfare
while providing fresh pork, uh, with the confidence
to progress with our investment ambitions.
And we would have the confidence in marketing our
New Zealand produced pork, both domestically
and overseas, knowing it leads the world from an animal
welfare perspective as well
as a New Zealand quality perspective.
This is achieved, we see positive impacts
for our New Zealand industry,
our New Zealand pork consumers, and, uh, New Zealand Dink.
We thank the committee again for, uh,
for hearing our views and, uh, having thank
You, thank you gentlemen for having, having the time
to come into parliament and apologize for our absence again.
Uh, we have one minute left.
Um, I just wanna note, note
that we're talking about in port pork
as being somewhat different from the bill at hand
and obviously, uh, it's outta the scope of the bill
or this current bill.
Um, but 30 seconds left.
Someone wants to ask a question
of the two wonderful gentlemen lead off. Thanks,
Mark Miles here.
Um, I just want to, uh, ask the gentleman
around the, um, we've been told by several submitters
or that Switzerland, Sweden
and Norway have banned, um, the faring crates it,
and you are saying that's not the case.
Perhaps you could, um, expand on that a little, please.
It, it comes down to actually confinement, which is
what a faring crate actually does.
Um, so while they've called out faring crates,
they have not, uh, actually cut off confinement, which is,
which is what we're talking about.
So, um, so that, that being the, the, the difference
that I make in regards to that comment,
Could you expand on that please?
It comes down to, it comes down to,
to actually confinement.
So they actually will still use confinement to,
to keep the sour, um, safe so
that the piglets don't get rolled over.
So while they, while they're, their space at the moment, um,
um, as not as, as as sorry larger than ours,
they are still actually using confinement.
So to say that that confinement isn't happening is not true.
Interesting. Thank you. I stop on that.
Yeah. I believe it's very, very, very, very quickly.
Please
Do, do you mean that they're using pins rather than Right,
but they're substantially larger.
They are. They are larger than the
actual, uh, faren crate.
Correct. But they are still, the images
I've seen that are very different
For the ones that have said that they've, they've, uh,
found, uh, banned faren crates.
They're actually still having confinement. So that's, yeah.
Thanks. Thanks, gen.
Sorry to, to move things along so quickly.
We've just got, um, over a dozen people to hear from,
um, before one o'clock.
So thank you both for coming in. It, it's, it's a journey.
I know, and we're grateful for your time and,
and your thoughts and ideas on a salient issue.
So gentlemen, have a great day. Thank
You. Thank you.
Thank you.
Righto. People, we have, um,
I believe Fresh Cork, New Zealand, oh, sorry, not FreshCo.
New Sarah Harris. Sorry, moving on,
Sarah. Definitely Sarah, not
Fresh. Sarah. Hi. I'm
definitely not fresh New Zealand.
I do apologize. I just got dozens of people that I have
to go through and, um, you are about one of them.
So nice to meet you Sarah.
Nice to meet you too. We'll leave you with it.
Awesome. So, hi everybody. Um, so my name's Sarah.
Um, I know there's been a lot
of vets and things like that talking.
Um, I'm none of those. Um,
I'm just an ordinary New Zealander sitting
outside my, my work office.
Um, and the re I've never done this before.
My heart's going so fast.
Um, but the reason I'm here today is because
Fine, we just, we just, we're,
we're also just Kiwis, so you go for gold. Yeah.
Well, I just give a damn about like kindness and fairness.
And so when I saw this in the news, um, I,
I felt obligated to, to speak up.
Um, I've seen up close to
what it means when an animal trusts you, like
how they look at you completely dependent on your choices.
Um, and that's what makes this so personal to me.
Um, because those mother pigs in bowing crates,
they depend on us too.
Um, they can't speak, they can't fight back,
and they're trapped in a system that sees them
as production units rather than mothers or living beings.
Um, we can't pretend that looking
so cell in a metal cage unable to turn around
or touch your babies is humane.
It's suffering. I know it, you know it,
my studies submitters know it.
Um, we wouldn't dream of treating a dog that way, but
because it happens behind closed doors out in the
countryside, um, we people allow it
and they pretend it's not happening.
Um, to me this is about power. Power doesn't make right.
Just because we can confine
and control animals doesn't mean we should.
Um, New Zealand has always prided itself on being a nation
that values kindness, giving the woman the vose, et cetera.
Um, so it's pretty embarrassing
that the government's just sort of just like
taken this from the pork industry.
I mean, like shame. That's pretty embarrassing.
Um, and I have to ask, when your time in government is over,
when your name's gone from the newspapers,
what will you be remembered for?
Do you wanna be remembered as someone
that takes it from the pork industry
or someone that spoke out about kindness?
'cause that's what people remember about a life.
Um, and now there's a saying, I've always loved
that you can judge a person by how they treat those.
It can do nothing for them.
Um, I think that's true of government as well.
Um, right now, farm animals in this country live in
what can be described as a hell on earth, confined confines,
mutilated, used up disposed of.
Um, and we can stop some of that suffering.
Um, there are farmers out there
that are already doing things differently,
giving south space to move to nest, to be mothers.
Um, those are the farmers that
as a nation we should be supporting, um, not clinging
to outdated, cruel methods that belong in the past.
Um, and the final thing I wanna say is, I'm actually,
I'm really surprised about this
because like the government was doing so well with,
with freeing the greyhounds,
and this is just dumping any votes that they managed
to get from animal lovers.
I mean, how embarrassing. Um, yeah,
and that's the main thing I wanted to say.
Again, not well spoken, not a vet, I just have to say it.
Thanks.
Well, I, I just wanna say one thing, Sarah.
You should be very proud of yourself.
It is quite, uh, um, uh, significant task often
for some people to talk to.
Strangers, especially politicians.
So I think you've done marvelously well. Good on you.
Um, questions for Sierra team while we have here online.
No, they don't appear to be any questions.
Sarah, um, great, great submission.
I think you, I hope you do it. I've got a question, Steve.
No, no. Just saying great work. Yeah, no, great work.
Um, my team are, are, are very happy for, for you.
You've done marvelously well
and um, I hope you have a fantastic day.
Yeah, back to work. Alright, bye everyone. Take care.
Alright, team, we now go on Brown,
who I believe should be online as well.
Hello? Hello. Hello, brown, please. Thank you.
Um, we welcome to this, uh,
primary production select committee.
We have you for five minutes.
Please, by all means, if you, um, your spare bit
of time at the end of it, we'd love
to ask you some questions.
So, sure. Uh, I'll leave you for your five minutes slot.
Thank you. My name's Leoni Brown
and I'm a member of the public.
Um, I am really, really sad that the planned ban on use
of far ferry crates that was due
to be passed into legislation in December, 2025
is now not gonna happen.
And I'm strongly opposed
to the animal welfare amendment bill for two reasons.
First, from an animal welfare concern
under the Animal Welfare Act, NAAC,
whom I'm assuming most people would know, what
that organization is very important.
Uh, and films the politicians about animal welfare,
they introduced a code of welfare
practice in which five freedoms were considered
to be essential for animals.
Freedom from hunger
and thirst, freedom from discomfort, freedom from pain,
injury and disease, freedom to behave naturally,
freedom from fear and distress.
I would say that four out
of five freedoms are breached in relationship to pigs
and faroh crates.
There is no way
that pigs are free from discomfort
squashed into a faroh crate.
As a result, they're pro to shoulder lesions, ticked lesions
and lameness that covers the third freedom.
Freedom from pain, injury and disease.
Freedom to behave naturally is prevented.
Pharaoh crates prevent nest building,
which is an essential part of a pig's behavior.
No nesting material is
provided for them while they're in these crates.
Freedom from fear and distress.
Anyone who has been near a pig house farm
will hear the pig's distress.
You hear cries, you hear squeals, you hear screams.
There is a mismatch between a so's behavioral needs
and the Pharaoh crate design, which results in a compromise
to the welfare of the sour.
Second NAC expert advice has been ignored by government.
I find that rather rude by Andrew Hoard.
This is a body of experts that were set up
to advise politicians on animal welfare.
Andrew Hoard, who was the minister of animal welfare,
stated on Radio New Zealand, we have listened to
and considered a broad range of perspectives.
Chief science advisor for the SPCA, Dr.
Anya Dale says neither her
or her colleagues were, um, consulted.
Hogar also stated he conducted further targeted
consultations with New Zealand pork,
the industry pork body representing pig farmers.
They had at least eight meetings with Hagar during,
since being elected to government.
According to his ministerial diaries, he met
with SPCA five times over the same period
and did not reveal any details about planned pork reforms.
Despite being asked on several occasions, his comment,
that extensive consultation had been carried out
with key stakeholders
and the public on pig welfare reforms seems
rather suspicious.
It is prioritizing interests of the pork industry
and not the welfare of animals.
Isn't his portfolio the minister of animal welfare?
What's happening? The pig industry argues farrow creates a
necessary to stop cells from crushing their piglets.
Many science sites on this subject state,
this is a challenge regarding housing types open
or close faroh crates
or outdoor, at least if they're outdoors,
their freedom rights are met.
Science advisors also comment that animal husbandry
and increased staff numbers during the postpartum period up
to weaning plays a big role in reducing piglet deaths.
And lastly, I have a quote from safe.
When governments change the law to make cruelty legal,
every safeguard for animals is at risk.
That's all I want to say. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. And thank you for your submission, Leoni.
We have one minute left for questions.
If members have any questions for Leoni, um, Steve
or Rachel or Joe, um, might have a question.
No.
Yeah, I've got a quick one. Yeah. Thanks Steve.
Go gold.
Um, Leoni, thank you for your submission.
Um, I think you've articulated very clearly,
are you also concerned that even
after this new standard comes in, in 10 years,
where the cages are fractionally larger,
that they won't meet our welfare standards?
No, they won't. That if you,
if you think about those five freedoms
and four of those are compromised by being c created,
no matter if they're an open crate
or the closed crate,
it's not gonna make much difference to their freedoms.
Yeah, exactly. It makes sense to me. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Very good. Thank you team.
Um, thank you Leone, thank you for your time. Thank
You very much for your time.
No gracious me, we, this is what we're here for.
Um, have a great day.
And you too. Very good. Take care. Thanks Teo.
Um, we now have Sue, if I pronounce that correctly.
Hello everyone. Hello. Hello.
Uh, uh, I assume you're our next submitter.
Uh, yes, Please. By all means introduce yourself.
We have you for five minutes.
Okay. Um, I'm ong I'm Malaysian by birth.
I'm also presenting as an individual.
Um, yes, as just a member of the public.
I don't have any real knowledge of, um, animal welfare.
Um, not particularly. Mm-hmm.
My, My submission is mainly about procedural fairness.
Um, given that this is an amendment bill,
so the, or originate originating bill was passed years ago,
as my understanding was 2020.
And the deadline was given was five years for farmers to,
um, to make the change.
Mm-hmm. Um, to now extend it for another 10 years
seems ridiculous.
I mean, you sort of saying the government sets the law
and then after that we sort of say, okay,
well you can't meet it so we'll, we'll let you go.
We'll let you do, um, give you another 10 years to,
to comply with it.
I mean, such things are not extended
to the unemployed, for instance.
Um, such things are not extended to lots of people
who don't comply with the law.
And I don't understand why, um, you would double the amount
of time given, given to, um, a sector
of a particular sector.
I mean, it's just ridiculous.
If, if, if you extended it by a year,
then perhaps I wouldn't be submitting today.
But to extend it for 10 years seems to me way beyond the,
the, um, yeah.
Intent of the law.
You, yourself, um, almost sort saying,
we'll kick it down the road.
Sorry, kick the can down the road
and maybe something will change in the future.
So basically that's my objection to the, to this bill.
And by the way, I surprisingly agree with, um,
the previous submitter who was here, the pork
of the pork industry, and sort of saying that
although it's a completely different subject,
rules should apply both to locally produce, um, pork
and imported pork,
although it's, you know, not within the
remit of this, um, bill.
Anyway, that's my submission.
And so I welcome any questions.
Well, thank you sir for coming in.
Uh, I'm sorry that my parliamentarian colleagues
who will probably be most interested in your remarks,
uh, are absent.
We, we are in a recess, we can often
find ourselves around the country.
Questions for this gentleman.
Members, Shirley,
don't appear to be any, I have a quick question.
Um, how do you square that?
The government is not parliament.
It is a, is as good for parliamentarians
and Parliament ultimately decides laws by, um,
by majority vote.
And in this instance, um, the process that we are going
through is to try
and find a way where laws are not necessarily fit
for purpose and need to be, uh, amended,
rejigged redesigned.
Do you think that is the role in this instance
of parliament, um, in regards to the pork industry?
Maybe the pork industry is finding
that there is a regulatory hold that needs
to be filled or fixed.
Um, you are right. So parliament is sovereign.
It's, um, and that, um, the governor
or cabinet doesn't, doesn't make laws.
I fully agree with you. Mm-hmm.
However, having said that, um,
it was the previous parliament that passed the law.
So you can't, can't solve just say that it's, it's
this parliament listening to farmers,
whereas the previous parliament didn't.
Um, the previous parliament
also weighed up the subject matter
and decided that five years was sufficient time for farmers
to, um, to change the reform
or whatever, whatever the, the rule is.
Um, that they were given a grace of five years to do,
to carry out the actions.
And Parliament at that time thought that that was adequate,
um, to solve, suddenly extend that to 10 years.
As I say, solve is almost like bending over backwards.
And I, as I said, again, you wouldn't extend that, um,
courtesy to the unemployed.
And so of saying, well, you haven't, you haven't
met your quarter of job applications,
we'll give you double the amount of time to,
to do your job applications
before we start, um, doing sanctions or something like that.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Well, sir, we've met time.
I wanna thank you for your remarks today.
I want to thank you for being in person in Parliament.
It's quite an ordeal
and I, um, I can congratulate you on your
efforts and your thoughts.
Um, again, it all goes into the diary of, of submissions
that we hear and we work through them
and make an informed decision based on
what the constituencies told us.
So thank you sir, for your time today. We're very good.
We don't have any other submitted online yet, so, uh,
I can I suggest that we suspend a meeting
until we get some more submitters?
Absolutely. Will, will you be so kind to inform my team
when we have a resumption of availability, please?
Yeah, I can do that. Very good.
Just an email or a text or something.
So I, I'll stay online.
I'm sitting in my car in the middle of a.